---
title: ABOUT THE WORK
date: 2016-03-14 20:38:00 -04:00
---

From 1976 to 1982, Tony Conrad (1940-2016) created “Music and the Mind of the World,” a piano composition comprising over 200 hours of recorded music. During this time everything Conrad played on the piano was recorded (with the incidental exception of perhaps three or four hours). In this endeavor – which includes the sounds of practicing, banging on the keys, formal exercises, experiments with the harmonic sonority of the piano itself, and even “On Top of Old Smokey” – we witness what might in essence be described as the total encounter between an improvising performer and the central instrument of Western musical culture. Now, for the first time, this influential yet largely unknown work has been published by [Arcangel Surfware](http://www.arcangelsurfware.biz) and is now available online for free at the domain musicandthemindofthe.world.


## Me and My Piano: Music and the Mind of the World
May, 2010
Tony Conrad

In 1938, Arthur, my father, got a phonograph for Christmas. Maybe it was fancy for its time; it had a beautiful tall speaker unit, perhaps as tall as I am now, and the radio-phonograph was housed in the top of a blanket chest cabinet, separate from the speaker housing. Did I mention that the phonograph only played 78 rpm records? With re-sharpenable cactus needles? No, I didn't need to mention that, because that was the only kind of record available in those days. Arthur's wife Mary, my mother, liked to listen to the opera when it was broadcast from the Met by Texaco, every weekend, but other than that, she took a limited interest in music. I was born in 1940. When I was three or four, I got a little album of 78 rpm records for Christmas one year, and some kind of little phonograph that I could use to play them. It was really my first experience with music of any kind.

On the album, there was a sticker expressing the fact that due to wartime conditions the records were not unbreakable. I was careful with them. They were 7 inch records of classical music melodies: “Humoresque,” something from the “Nutcracker Suite,” an instrumental version of an aria from “La Traviata,” and so forth. Arthur's records were almost all 12 inch 78s. When he played them, he would go into something like a trance, wave his arms around like a conductor, and obviously become transported. He had the Beethoven “Violin Concerto,” the Tchaikovsky “First Piano Concerto,” Brahms' “Fourth Symphony,” “Gaite Parisienne” by Offenbach, “Clair de Lune” by Debussy—generally a whole shelf full of romantic music. When I hit fifth grade, I started violin lessons. I had a paper route, and I finally earned enough money one year to buy a cheap violin so that I could continue even after I left fifth grade.

In the 1950s I found myself taking violin lessons from a private teacher. I wasn't practising very much, and I did pretty badly. Nevertheless, I was taking lessons, so at least I had some kind of contact with a professional world of music, particularly through this young man who wanted to help me understand more about music, about what was going on with music—because music had begun to affect me more and more profoundly. By now Arthur played the phonograph much less, and I played it much more. I got hold of Arthur's phonograph, and I would play the Tchaikovsky “Piano Concerto” 78s at top volume, over and over, over and over to everyone else's point of distraction. The recordings of Heifetz playing violin concertos were simply discouraging to me as a violin student, in spite of the fact that all of those romantic classical music records did make my heart soar; soar on the wings of youthful hormones, a big dose of loneliness and desolation (because we lived miles out in the country), and a profound commitment to the classical romantic idiom. I was very curious how all of this worked: how was music put together in such a way as to achieve the kind of effects that I was experiencing?

God help the young violin student who forever has to play all by himself without the supportive sonorities of another instrument. The thin keening of a solo violin, played without vibrato by a beginner, gives rise to many uncertainties—particularly in the context of a virtual comparison with Heifetz. Why, after all, should I practise, when to tell the truth, it was clear that I would never sound like Heifetz? I was so thirsty for sound to listen to, during those agonized adolescent years; I tuned in the radio to listen to faraway stations like WWVA in Wheeling, West Virginia, which was so much more romantic than the local country music station in Baltimore. I wished that we had FM radio like my girlfriend’s family. They had a piano, too. A nice hi-fi set, FM radio, and a piano were middle class luxuries that my family seemed unable to afford.

Arthur seemed unsuited to finding a regular job. He was, after all, an artist—Yale BFA, studied watercolor with Eliot O’Hara, worked in naval camouflage during the War—but landscapes and portraiture were in cultural decline. Almost everything in the way of regular work reeked of compromise. When he got occasional commissions to do portraits, it took lean months for him to complete the work. Mary picked up her career teaching French after us kids were old enough to be left on our own for a while, but I never really had any money while I was in school. Finally one Christmas Aunt Louise sent us kids as a gift a little red plastic phonograph that would play 33 rpm and 45 rpm records. Wow. I sent off coupons and joined records societies just to get the free record that was offered as an inducement. There is a sharp and desperate memory that's easy for me to recover: I'm lying in bed in the dark with my ear pressed uncomfortably against the speaker, almost silently playing a 33 of “Scheherazade” on the little red phonograph. 

Meanwhile, my violin teacher Mr. Knudsen had helped me to begin to understand something about the combination of notes that comprises harmony. Since I didn't play the violin with vibrato, and refused to do so, bowing two strings together created a stark interaction between the two notes involved. When you play the violin your ear is very close to the instrument. Mr. Knudsen pointed out that many violin players became deaf in their left ear over the course of time; I have by now noticed this myself. In any case, while bowing two strings at the same time, I could hear very clearly a number of combination effects: different tones, beats, harmony and dissonance. These exercises began building into a great library of wonderful sounds, the first truly sonorous and plangent experiences I had ever found in the violin—playing harmonic intervals exactly in tune, and then later also retuning the violin to emphasize the magnificent resonance I found in these sustained intervals.  

Miraculously, I was admitted to Harvard with a scholarship. One year I took harmony, hoping to get to the bottom of it. It was painfully difficult for me, because I didn't play the piano and all. I couldn't even read bass clef at first. The other students hammered their way through the exercises with fingers that fell into the pattern of the keys with practiced ease, while I sorted my way meticulously from one note to the next, hoping for the best. In the end, I didn't do very well with this, but it became clear that the practice if not the theory of harmony (and probably both) circled around the piano like a vortex. I attended music events—new music, classical performances, and what we would now call “world music” talks and performances. I learned that the curious intrinsic structures of Indian music spiraled outward from the instrumental practices of the veena, and it seemed clear to me that the piano had played the same role in Western harmonic music.

Back home, my family had somehow outfitted itself with an old upright. What a priceless luxury! When I was home to visit, I could try out chords—even though there was really nobody there with whom I could play duets on the violin, should I have been ready to do such a thing. Everything converged one Christmas when my mother died. My father had died Christmas Eve the year before, which made the tragedy somehow more focused and intense. Parents, loss, memory, Christmas, romantic longings, the piano, and music as a recourse and solace for being left alone somehow in the world. It was 1976, and by this point I had already been improvising my own kind of harmonic music for almost two decades, so I decided to turn to the piano. The piano: the center of Western tradition, the embodiment of traditional discipline and practice, a great blank landscape I had never touched except to drift; the harmonic veil through which we all expected to perceive one another's inner psychological life.

So I decided to record everything I did, every touch to the keys, and I called it “Music and the Mind of the World.” I was interested in the sounds of practising, of banging on the keys, of trying to hammer through old tunes that I knew, of formal exercises that might occur to me from moment to moment, and of course of the harmonic sonority of the piano itself. In relation to the piano as a physical instrument I had some history, in fact, in addition to my harmony course experience. While I was at Harvard I picked up an idea somewhere about a 19-tone equal tempered octave, and this stimulated me to appropriate an old piano that my friends dragged to my dorm room through the street. The tuning adjustments I made on it were extreme, and when I was done it hardly sounded like a piano at all. I had developed a voracious interest in tuning systems and practises by that time, further encouraged by my discovery of scordatura violin music, written for open tunings. I prized a copy of Alfred H. Howe’s Scientific Piano Tuning and Servicing. After I moved to New York in 1962, I bought a small Romanian cimbalom for $15 from Moses Blank’s decrepit music shop at 190 East 2nd Street. It was amenable to tuning, and this had been my plan until Angus MacLise used it in the (eponymous) film Chumlum, and thereby made the instrument irrevocably his own. At that time, as it happened, I was living next door to a piano factory, now long gone, at the corner of Ludlow and Grand.

Henry Flynt tried to get me to accompany him by playing some very simple blues riffs on the piano, but somehow I couldn't really do it. The piano is a percussion instrument, and I had never played a percussion instrument before; my sense of rhythm, even on the violin, was limited, and the extended duration drone music that I customarily performed, at that time and since, is putatively the most arhythmic music ever written. It had impressed me greatly when my friend Angus, one day during our rehearsals at La Monte Young's loft, asked me offhandedly if he could try out my violin. Angus was a great percussionist, but the violin is notoriously difficult, as I well knew, and I handed him the violin with a grain of salt, so to speak. Angus simply took up the bow and immediately began to play vigorously and with abandon; he was exciting to hear, it was excellent, and I understood that a percussionist could play anything. I had had a similar lesson from John Cage about listening: with sounds provided at random, the conditions were set for the listener to do the work of liking the music, whatever it might be. There might even be extraneous sounds, incidental sounds, unexpected techniques, different cultural approaches, selections programmed by someone else—as off the radio for example; in effect, anything at all. For me this fundamentally aesthetic challenge had been received as an entirely practical exercise. For years, following my exposure to Cage, I studiously tackled music and sounds that I didn't like, modulating my preferences and prejudices willfully in the direction of liking, until even some of the most difficult sounds for me to enjoy became truly heartwarming and aesthetically trenchant.

Jack Smith, whom I met in 1963, represented an opposite philosophy to that of Cage. The pop sounds and dance rhythms he liked struck me as distastefully common, easy, and boring. But the pathway I found to liking them was psychologically smooth; the animating elements of nostalgia, familiarity, common practice, natural body rhythm, and singability somehow jumped directly across the conceptual gap that Cage occupied. So it was, that a decade and a half later, I began to see the piano as a fulcrum between the seductive elements of the Western tradition and the conceptual opportunities that remained for sonic exploration. In my pathetic practise, I could use the piano to reach out in the direction of psychological fulfillment and immediate pleasure, grasping at tunes, tone, melodic lilt, rhythmic seduction, and nostalgic nuance, while simultaneously veiling my presentation behind the screens of technical ineptitude, poor recording quality (which was inevitable, due to circumstances), and a kind of hopelessly nerdy outlook.

All of this is not to say that I didn't by this time know a good amount about music and sound. In particular, I knew what the piano could do with single notes, repeated chords, the resonance effects of the sustain pedal, and simple note combinations that reflected my harmonic interests. I could make the piano fly, soar across endless space, make you close your eyes and see—by strumming, coursing across the keys, picking out a few surprises, and letting the voice of the piano speak loudly for itself. There are lengthy moments among these recordings that for me are a simple joy to hear. These keep me tethered close to the piece, but the more awkward and unlistenable segments are by far the most interesting. The problematic measure of presence in recorded music has been a constant source of irritation and inquiry ever since sound was first recorded at the end of the 19th century. Listening to early cylinder recordings, for example, we need to invest our full attentiveness if we are to begin to pierce the thick technological screen between us and the performance. With enough focus, something like the presence of the originating events begins to emerge, like the outlines of a garden as the snow melts.

At the end of January 1977 a dilly of a blizzard slammed Buffalo, just as Anne Turyn and I were driving in from New York. I had only recorded part or all of four cassette tapes, three of them within a couple of weeks of Mary’s death. She died Christmas Day 1976, and that afternoon I recorded the first piano tape, on the old upright that finally was a part of our family home in Baldwin, Maryland. I still didn’t have a piano, and I didn’t record again until May, when I was able to play on Anne’s family piano in Newton, Massachusetts. It was only in September, 1977 that I finally got hold of a Weber upright, which I kept at that time in a studio room provided to me by Media Study/Buffalo; by this time I had already recorded more than ten hours on other pianos.

Along the way, there were certain figures that I picked up and carried forward. There was, for example, “On Top of Old Smokey,” a folk tune that had struck me very much as a young person. Also, there appeared a kind of theme that persisted over the course of the coming years, a figure that alternated a chord in E flat with a G minor chord. Just a week before the end of the first year, on December 18, I gave the first public performance of my piano work. My trusting friend, Rhys Chatham, had invited me to participate at The Kitchen in the first New Music America Festival, New Music New York. The fact that I was almost completely unprepared was not an issue for me, nor was it an obstacle that I was completely insecure about what I was going to do. These aspects, I felt, were a central concern of the project, and should be foregrounded rather than veiled. The flip side of this, too, was implicated: the fact that I allowed myself undue confidence and self-assurance, especially in certain moments of the presentation. Everything at the level of the performance activity itself was to be legitimized; but for this to happen, it was essential that there be a range of material incorporated, from the familiar to the arbitrary, from the proficient to the diffident, from the novel to the trite, and from the decisive to the tentative. By so scattering the source material, I wanted to animate a level of confusion or consternation in the presence of which the listeners would be required to either slip off into a trance or to remove themselves to a critical distance at which they would receive this polymodal material as the product of a careful design, a gesture of reassigned musical values: a hypostatization of critical level in the direction of what was soon to be thought of as the “postmodern.” 

But music flows through time, and it's difficult to achieve critical distance in the course of live performance. I was expecting a lot, so I shouldn't have been surprised when I didn't get very much in the way of critical approbation. The scant response that my performance solicited was negative. The lack of response that predominated spoke to me even more clearly; I was on my own it seemed. So I began in 1978 full of confidence, but isolated in my practice.


## About this site
March, 2017
Cory Arcangel

Tony would use two titles – Music and the Mind of the World  and Music and the Mind of the Word – when discussing this composition, and decided to use World for this site. musicandthemindofthe.world is generated from audio found on 222 1/8th inch cassette tapes that he delivered Arcangel Surfware in September of 2016. These cassettes were sent to George Blood LP, and digitized at 32 bit, 96000 Hz. Upon receipt, each file – one for each side of a cassette – was listened to by the Arcangel Surfware team and cross-referenced with Tony's notes written on each cassette. Tony's notes contained information on the date the recording was made, and sometimes the location of the recording and the piano used. Some cassettes contained recordings made on multiple dates. On this site, Tony and I decided to break piano sessions on a single day into different parts. A part would be determined if a session spanned two sides of a tape, had clear recording breaks (given the fidelity of the recordings–Tony used different recorders– sometimes this was a judgement call), or had large sections of unrelated dialog (which was to be edited out). Once the session parts were determined via timecode, the audio files were run through a script that split them into individual files. These files were then mastered by Jon Cohrs at Spleenless mastering. Programmed by Familiar Design Studo, the site pulls from the [spreadsheet](https://github.com/coryarcangel/music-and-the-mind-of-the-world/blob/gh-pages/_data/master.csv) complied by Arcangel Surfware.  The website is a Jekyll site, hosted on [Github pages](https://github.com/coryarcangel/music-and-the-mind-of-the-world/) with all of the .mp3 files being served off of Amazon S3. The sessions are also mirrored on [Youtube](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCPjrcaZeU9rMGAbmfYWeeLw). We hope you enjoy.


## Change log

12-18-2021: Corrected typo, "222 8mm inch cassette tapes" to "222 1/8th inch cassette tapes". Commented out Twitter bot (while I try to get it up again)   
03-07-2017: Beta site up.   
04-03-2017: Locations corrected matmotw_477-485. Location added matmotw_619. Youtube vids listed. Launch!  
09-27-2017: Twitter bot [launched](https://twitter.com/on_this_day_mmw).

## Contact   
info AT [arcangelsurfware](http://www.arcangelsurfware.biz) DOT biz 